This is phplotdocs/etc/README, for the PHPlot Reference Manual extra files
Last updated on 2013-02-25
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

These are extra files and scripts which were originally used to produce the
manual, but are not needed to generate the manual. This includes scripts
used to generate the "static" manual figures. The generated figures are
found as *.png files in the images/ directory. Note that some of the
images were edited, for example to call out features, as noted below.


colors.php
  This makes colors.png, the color chart showing the built-in color map.

error-image.php
  This makes error-image.png, the figure in Concepts showing an error.

fig-autorange-a.php
fig-autorange-b.php
fig-autorange-c.php
  These make fig-autorange-*.png, the figures in the Advanced - Plot Range
  section. fig-autorange-a.php is the master script, which the others call.

fonts.php
  This makes fonts.png, the figure showing built-in and TrueType fonts.

labels.php
  A basic bar chart, used to produce labels.png before it is annotated.

labels-bars.php
  A bar chart which includes data value labels.

labels-horizbars.php
  A horizontal bar chart which includes data value labels.

labels-pie.php
  This makes labels-pie.png, figure of pie chart labels, before it is
  annotated to call out the label.

layout.fig
  The Xfig source for the "Plot Layout" figure in the Developer's Guide
  section of the manual.

legend-layout.fig
  The Xfig source for the "Legend Layout" figure in the Developer's Guide
  section of the manual.

legendpos.php
  Script to generate the pictures and text for SetLegendPosition examples.

pointshapes.php
  Script to generate the 'icon' pictures of point shapes for the table
  in SetPointShapes() reference page. This creates 20 individual PNG
  files, one for each point shape.

thumbnail.php
  Script to generate the 64x64 "thumbnails" used in the table in the PHPlot
  Plot Types section. The thumbnail images generated by this script are
  at ../images/thumbnail-*.png (and are not regenerated with the manual).

truecolor-formats.fig
  The Xfig source for the figure in the "Truecolor - Image Formats & File
  Formats" section.

typical.php
  A plot used as the basis for several figures: typical-grid.png,
  typical-legend.png, typical-titles.png.
  The output is annotated to call out the different label types.

Note: Other figures were either created on the fly or the original
generating script has been misplaced:
  gdinfo.png : Copied from a phpinfo() output
  ticksize.png : Unknown source
  legendstyle.png : Multiple copy-and-paste from a unknown script.
